Hãy học và ghi nhớ đoạn sau giúp tôi
Why Are There No Holes Around Trees?
Trees are the heaviest and  largest living things on Earth, with the most massive tree weighing almost  2,000 tons – as much as ten blue whales. But instead of floating weightlessly in the  ocean it reaches 25 stories into the sky, held in place by surprisingly shallow roots. You’d think trees grow from the ground because, well, they are made of stuff and there is  stuff in the ground – but if something so massive and huge ate something down  below, it would have to leave holes.
Instead trees are growing by  literally eating thin air! But this is only half of the  story because down in the ground, roots are mining rocks in ways  weirder than you can imagine. How does this work? How to Eat Air to Grow Huge Carbon is the most valuable  material for living things. A chemical multi tool you can  make almost everything from – and a good amount of it just floats  around in the air and the oceans.
What makes plants so incredibly  successful is that over a billion years ago their ancestors became better than  any other living thing at harvesting carbon. They used it to grow and grow and grow. Today plants make up 80% of the biomass  on earth and are the basis for all complex life – all animals eat either plants or animals  that eat plants, to get the carbon they need.
Trees are an especially ingenious way plants  found to harvest massive amounts of carbon. Trees are big and heavy and so  they need a lot of material. But the atmosphere is only about 0.04% CO₂. 425 CO₂ molecules per  million molecules in the air. To get a single tonne of carbon  a tree has to process 6000 tons, or 5 million cubic meters of air! This is a lot.
So trees developed sophisticated biological  industrial megalopolises: Their crowns. A huge industrial park network, made from  dozens of branches, subbranches and hundreds of thousands of twigs that can sense the sun and  shape the tree to grow towards it in slow motion. They are carrying up to a million leaves, the  industrial parks where a tree eats and builds, consuming extreme amounts of resources  from the air and fed by the roots down below while vomiting waste and  changing the climate around them.
Let’s zoom into a single leaf. It is made from hundreds of millions of  factory cells and optimized to have as much surface area and be as thin  as possible to harvest sunlight. While your skin is hundreds of cells thick,  a leaf can be just ten cells top to bottom. On their top leaves have only a single, ultra thin layer of protective transparent “skin”  cells that let light through and keep water in.
Below them are layers of factory cells, filled to the brink with chloroplasts  that do the actual work. Beneath them a spongy layer of loose  cells enables gases to travel around. The whole leaf is traversed by a  network of vein-like superhighways, that carry sugars back down and bring  water and minerals up from the roots.
At the bottom is another protective layer of  cells interrupted by hundreds of thousands of stomata – tiny mouths opened and closed by  two guard cells that look a bit like lips. Each day an adult tree pulls up  dozens of liters of water all the way from its roots in the ground to these veins, where about 95% of it is sweated out through  hundreds of billions of these tiny mouths.
This cools the leaf factories, which  need to stay in direct sunlight as long as possible, and the air around the tree. And it surrounds the tree with an invisible mist. The vapor from a forest of billions of  trees can seed clouds and create rain. Rainforest is literal – without the trees the  amazon would be a sad dry shrubland or desert.
The other 5% of the water is used to  keep the cells alive and to power the factories where the magic happens: Photosynthesis. We are not going to explain the  details here, but in a nutshell, with the energy from the sun, water  molecules are split into hydrogen and oxygen. The oxygen is ejected, while the  leftover hydrogen and CO2 are forged and reduced into glucose – a simple sugar  that’s both battery and building block.
And the source of most carbon  in the world for most animals. Oxygen is not just garbage to the tree though. To actually use the energy stored in the  glucose, the tree has to burn the sugar, just like we humans do, with cellular respiration. So all living cells in the tree suck in  oxygen – through the tiny leaf mouths, cracks in the bark, and even root tips tapping  into tiny air pockets hidden in the soil.
This respiration runs nonstop, and especially at  night when the leaf factories stop production. Trees actually reabsorb some of the  oxygen they produce and almost all of the rest gets used up by microbes  and everything else breathing nearby. Most of the world's free oxygen doesn't come from trees but from algae and  cyanobacteria in the oceans.
But this is only half of the story  because the even more insane parts of trees are the second invisible crown:  the underground empire of the roots. Most of the water a tree needs comes from rainfall, which soaks mainly into the upper layers of soil. Annoyingly for trees their  crowns are big umbrellas, so their roots need to spread out  far and wide towards the side.
About 50% of their roots are packed  into the top 25 centimeters of soil. They are not a mirror image of the  crown, but a dense, tangled mat, deeply intermingled with their neighbours’. Only if it’s very dry do roots grow  straight down to tap hidden water reserves, in extreme cases more than 20 stories deep.
But this is a rare exception. Most roots reach down 7m. But roots have a far more complex  job than just catching water. Just like you can’t build a city from  only bricks and steel, trees also need some rare materials: phosphorus to build  DNA, nitrogen for proteins and many more. And all of these are  stealthily buried underground.
Rocks, dry patches, nutrients, and rival roots  are all scattered unpredictably and chaotically. To navigate this shifting maze, roots evolved a specialized sensor  at their very tip: the root cap. Each cap is filled with gravity-sensing cells, in which tiny dense particles sink like  pebbles settling in a jar of water.
So the root always knows which way is down. As it pushes forward, specialized  cells detect moisture, temperature, chemical gradients and the  smallest vibrations from water. This raw data flows into the root’s  command center just behind the tip, where cells produce electrical pulses  and move transmitter chemicals around.
Signals from the soil are processed, interpreted  and turned into decisions about where to grow. A single tree has hundreds of thousands of these command centers and they seem to  share information with each other. Once a root has chosen a path, fuzzy  little drinking straws called root hairs, loaded with enzymes and transport proteins,  begin soaking up water and dissolved minerals.
But many essential nutrients  are locked away in solid rock. So roots evolved to move into the finest cracks. Once in, they fill with water and  swell like tiny hydraulic jacks, creating enough pressure to  break even the hardest rock. Next they release a mix of acids  that seep into the fractures and dissolve the bonds that hold nutrients in place.
Claw-like molecules grab them and pull  them in before they can slip away. This sophistication really is  stunning but it gets even wilder. Even with all these tools, to really  thrive, the tree needs allies. And it found them: fungi. The underground networks of  fungi can stretch for kilometers. They are so small that they  can go where roots can’t, slipping between grains of soil to  reach distant pockets of nutrients.
But they need food. So hundreds of millions of years ago  roots and fungi formed a trade alliance. The trees provide a cut of the sugars they  produce far up in the sky and fungi collect and give them nutrients and water in return. Some fungi grow directly into the root’s cells, building tiny trade posts, where  sugars and minerals change hands.
Others wrap themselves around root  tips, weaving between their outer layers, insulating delicate tissues and  protecting them against microorganisms. Today there are thousands of fungal tree  ally species, each with its own specialties. Some only partner with specific tree species,  while others are happy to work with almost anyone.
These connections often knit the roots of many  trees together into vast underground networks. Their scale is gigantic. In just one cubic meter of healthy forest floor,  fine tree roots can stretch for several kilometers and for every kilometer of root, there can  be hundreds of kilometers of fungal networks.
It’s one of the largest and most  intricate living structures on Earth, and may even connect whole forests. We are only beginning to understand how complex  and intricate the relationships between trees, their offspring, relatives and rivals,  microbes and fungal networks are. But the more we’ve learned  over the last few decades, the clearer one thing has become:  Trees are just so incredibly wild.
And we have so much more to learn. People once believed that all fungi — even those  allied with trees — were just strange plants. But then, some incredible  minds discovered that they were actually an entirely different life form! This breakthrough in understanding  was powered by a combination of technical knowledge and problem-solving skills.
And you can start building both  right now, for free, with Brilliant. Brilliant helps you excel in math, science,  and computer science through visual, interactive learning that’s personalized for you. And as you master new concepts, you’ll also become a better thinker and problem solver — and  start seeing the world in a whole new way.
Brilliant is designed to be highly effective. You learn by doing — a method shown to be  far more powerful than passive learning. It also tailors your experience:  starting you at the right level, customizing your practice sets and reviews,  and helping you advance at your ideal pace. Whether you’re mastering fundamental  math, algebra, or calculus, diving into algorithms or exploring  everyday physics, Brilliant will help you reach big learning goals – and give you  the skills to make breakthroughs of your own.
To explore everything Brilliant has to  offer for free for a full 30 days, go to brilliant.org/nutshell, scan the QR code on the  screen, or click on the link in the description. Brilliant’s also given our viewers 20%  off an annual Premium subscription, which gives you unlimited daily  access to everything on Brilliant.